
                               ROAD STOP

                            by David Mason

               It was like any other car on the road. It
              was automatic, self-contained--and eternal!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, January 1963.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The highway stretched away in ruler-straight perspective toward both
horizons, black and shining in the sun like a river of ink. Beside
it, the bright pastel buildings of Rest Stop 25 stood among the green
trees. Occasionally a car shot past, a flash of metal and a hiss of
split wind; but the road was one which was used more often at night,
and was nearly empty in the afternoon.

Sam was the only attendant on duty. Stop 25 needed only two human
attendants, even at its busiest hours. He sat, staring out at the
highway, his elbows on the lunch counter, his round face blank, but
his mouth set tightly. The phone at his elbow emitted a small grunting
noise.

"You still there?" the phone voice said inquiringly.

"Yeah." Sam said, still staring at the highway.

"Well...." The voice paused. "Look, it might not come your way. It
usually turns west at the New Britain intersection."

"Not always." Sam said. "It went by here once before."

"It almost never stops, anyway," the voice said firmly. "It won't stop."

"Some times it does," Sam said.

"It doesn't have to."

Sam shrugged and said nothing.

"Okay, then," the voice said. "I called you about it, anyway."

"Thanks."

Sam turned away, still watching the road.

Far off a speck of metal gleamed, growing larger. The distant high
sound of brakes began, as a car decelerated, coming toward the Stop.

It was just an ordinary car, Sam told himself. That other car was
still hundreds of miles away. But his hands were damp as he watched it
grow larger.

It was an ordinary Talman sedan, with two people in it. It swung into
the Stop's parking area, and its doors slid open smoothly. A small red
light flashed on its arched front. The repair signal. In response the
doors of the Repair shop opened. The Talman waited, as a man and a
woman emerged from its padded interior and moved slowly into the Repair
shop. The doors closed behind it.

The couple came toward the restaurant, where Sam stood waiting.

"Hi," the man said to Sam.

"Afternoon." Sam moved to the counter. "Something to eat while you're
waiting, folks?"

The tall, dark girl glanced out at the closed doors of the Repair shop.

"How long's that car going to take?" she asked in a tired voice. "I
wanted to get home tonight."

"Not long," Sam said. "It didn't look like anything complicated."

"How can you tell?" the man asked, sitting down. "It could take all
night."

"Like something to eat while you're waiting?" Sam asked.

The woman stared at the lunch racks critically.

"I never like these places to eat in," the woman said, curling her lip.
"You never know how long the food's been stored in the robot."

"Oh, hell, Grace," the man said wearily. To Sam he gave an apologetic
shrug. "Just coffee."

"Well, you don't know," the woman insisted. "I mean...." She watched
Sam drawing the coffee into a cup. "I used to cook a lot, by hand, till
Jack had the autokitchen put in. He never had any stomach trouble till
then. It's getting so everything's ... oh, I don't know. It's all out
of reach. You don't know what's happening any more. Like the car."

"I wish I knew what she's talking about half the time," Jack said,
blowing on his coffee. Sam leaned on the counter, looking past the
couple toward the empty road.

"I know what the lady means," Sam said, almost to himself. "You get
to thinking ... well, I can remember when people used to drive their
own cars. Themselves. Steering and everything, except on the biggest
highways. And everything got done with people. People made things, and
cooked food, and grew plants. Everybody was busy all the time. It was
better then."

The man called Jack shrugged. "Sure, sure. Everybody always talks about
the good old days. But I don't see many of 'em going to live in the
woods. Like Grace--she says she doesn't like the autokitchen, but she
uses it."

"It saves time," Grace said. "I guess I will have coffee, too, mister."

"It saves time, she says," Jack said. "For what? She's got too much
time now."

"I wonder what it must have been like in the old days, here," Grace
said vaguely, staring around the lunchroom. "Everybody running in and
out. All the drivers--trucks, with men in them, the way you read about
it in the historical novels. Men that drove their own cars, in all
kinds of weather ... gee."

"Just like on TV," Sam said, grinning.

"I hope we get the car out of there pretty soon," Jack said anxiously.
He glanced out toward the silent garage. "I always wonder what would
happen if the machinery stuck, or something. How would you ever get
your car out?"

"It doesn't get stuck," Sam said. A peculiar look crossed his face as
he added, "Not any more."

"Did it ever?"

Sam shrugged. "Oh, well, you know twenty or thirty years ago all this
automatic stuff wasn't quite so good as it is now. Cars, repair
shops ... things went wrong, sometimes. Like ... like the Traveler."

"The Traveler?" The woman looked up. "Oh, that's just a ghost story.
Like the Flying Dutchman. Isn't it?"

The lunchroom was completely silent. Sam was no longer paying any
attention to the couple sitting at the counter. He was close to the
big window, standing stiffly, feet apart, like an admiral on a ship's
bridge, his eyes studying the empty horizon. There, where the lines
of the road met with the precision of a drawing-board exercise in
perspective, he thought he saw a fleck of light.

"It isn't when it goes past," Sam said, in a quiet tight voice. He
talked at the window, his back to the other two, his words meant
mostly for himself.

"It's not its going by. That doesn't bother me," he repeated. "It came
by my old place five or six times, I remember. That's why I finally
asked to be transferred out here, where it hardly ever goes by. But I
could have gotten used to it. I mean, you don't have to look at it, or
anything. It's just another car. Old, sure, but there's no difference.
A car goes by, that's all. Only...."

"You mean it's real?" the woman asked, in a low voice.

Her husband's eyes were looking out, toward the empty road, following
Sam's look.

"The Traveler," he said, without looking at his wife. "Sure, it's real.
Why'd you think they don't make that model of car any more? It's real.
I knew somebody who saw it, once."

"There might even be two or three Travelers," Sam said, watching the
distant glitter of light. There was certainly a car coming. Just a
car ... although it was still too far away to tell for sure.

"A haunted car!" the woman said, her eyes wider. "Gee!"

"It isn't a haunted car," her husband said. "It's just one of the
earliest makes of automatic highway cars. Everything automatic,
steering, destination set ... just like any car is, nowadays. Only it
wasn't quite perfect, somehow."

"They got into their car," Sam said, his eyes picking out distant,
microscopic details. The high flaring fins, the double headlamps ...
lit up, although it was broad daylight on the road. He knew what the
rest would be. It was moving so slowly. But it always moved slowly,
barely thirty miles an hour. As if somebody wanted you to look and
see....

"They just got in, the way anybody would do," Sam said. "They set a
destination, and the windows closed up, and the airconditioner went on,
and the car went out on the road."

"Only it never got there," the other man said. "Wherever it was going
to go."

"But ..." the woman looked puzzled. "Wouldn't anybody stop it? I mean,
wouldn't it run out of fuel, or ... well, how did the people in it get
out?"

"It does just what any car does," her husband told her. "It gets fuel
when it needs it. You can't just stop a robot control device. Not till
it's good and ready."

"But the people in it," she said. "They'd starve, or something...."

The car called the Traveler, rolling at the stately thirty miles an
hour it always held, was coming down the road now, and the two men
stood, watching. The woman, a little behind them, watched too, her face
growing whiter. No one said anything as the old fashioned car rolled
by, straight and steady down the highway, holding the center of the
lane as sharply as it always did.

There was a film of dust inside the windows, though the Traveler was
clean and shining outside. But the film did hide the white bone faces,
the despairing hands that had long ago stopped trying to break through
those closed windows.

"They never did get out," the man named Jack said, as the Traveler
rolled on, growing smaller along the endless road.

"I don't mind it when it goes past," Sam said, his voice thinner edged.
"I really don't. It's just a car. Things like that used to happen. I
mean, it's a car. Even when it stops to get gas, I don't have to pay
any attention."

He looked at the couple, his mouth loose. "As long as it just goes on.
That's all right. But I keep thinking some day it'll stop. And the door
will open. And maybe ... maybe they'll want lunch."

He giggled uncontrollably, and then choked it back.

Outside, the big hangar doors of the repair shop opened. The car that
had been inside appeared; it moved out and stopped, its doors open
invitingly.

"Your car's ready now," Sam told the couple. "So long, folks. Have a
nice trip."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Road Stop, by David Mason

